Monetary policy decisions

17/02/23, 19:03

PRESS RELEASE

Monetary policy decisions

10 June 2021

At today’s meeting, the Governing Council decided to confirm its very accommodative monetary policy stance:

The interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit
facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively. The Governing Council expects the key ECB
interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels until it has seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a level
sufficiently close to, but below, 2% within its projection horizon, and such convergence has been consistently reflected in
underlying inflation dynamics.

The Governing Council will continue to conduct net asset purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase
programme (PEPP) with a total envelope of €1,850 billion until at least the end of March 2022 and, in any case, until it
judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over. Based on a joint assessment of financing conditions and the inflation
outlook, the Governing Council expects net purchases under the PEPP over the coming quarter to continue to be
conducted at a significantly higher pace than during the first months of the year.

The Governing Council will purchase flexibly according to market conditions and with a view to preventing a tightening of
financing conditions that is inconsistent with countering the downward impact of the pandemic on the projected path of
inflation. In addition, the flexibility of purchases over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions will continue to
support the smooth transmission of monetary policy. If favourable financing conditions can be maintained with asset
purchase flows that do not exhaust the envelope over the net purchase horizon of the PEPP, the envelope need not be
used in full. Equally, the envelope can be recalibrated if required to maintain favourable financing conditions to help
counter the negative pandemic shock to the path of inflation.

The Governing Council will continue to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the
PEPP until at least the end of 2023. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid
interference with the appropriate monetary policy stance.

Net purchases under the asset purchase programme (APP) will continue at a monthly pace of €20 billion. The Governing
Council continues to expect monthly net asset purchases under the APP to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the
accommodative impact of its policy rates, and to end shortly before it starts raising the key ECB interest rates.

The Governing Council also intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it starts raising the key ECB interest rates,
and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation.

Finally, the Governing Council will continue to provide ample liquidity through its refinancing operations. The funding
obtained through the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) plays a crucial role in
supporting bank lending to firms and households.

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moves towards
its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press conference starting
at 14:30 CET today.

CONTACT
European Central Bank

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb.mp210610~b4d5381df0.en.html

Page 1 of 2

Monetary policy decisions

17/02/23, 19:03

Sonnemannstrasse 20

Directorate General
Communications


 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Reproduction is permitted provided that the
source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Copyright 2023, European Central Bank

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb.mp210610~b4d5381df0.en.html

Page 2 of 2

