Monetary policy decisions

17/02/23, 19:05

PRESS RELEASE

Monetary policy decisions

10 September 2020

At today’s meeting the Governing Council of the ECB took the following monetary policy decisions:

(1) The interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the
deposit facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively. The Governing Council expects the key
ECB interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels until it has seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a
level sufficiently close to, but below, 2% within its projection horizon, and such convergence has been consistently
reflected in underlying inflation dynamics.

(2) The Governing Council will continue its purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) with
a total envelope of €1,350 billion. These purchases contribute to easing the overall monetary policy stance, thereby
helping to offset the downward impact of the pandemic on the projected path of inflation. The purchases will continue to
be conducted in a flexible manner over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions. This allows the Governing
Council to effectively stave off risks to the smooth transmission of monetary policy. The Governing Council will conduct
net asset purchases under the PEPP until at least the end of June 2021 and, in any case, until it judges that the
coronavirus crisis phase is over. The Governing Council will reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the PEPP until at least the end of 2022. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be
managed to avoid interference with the appropriate monetary policy stance.

(3) Net purchases under the asset purchase programme (APP) will continue at a monthly pace of €20 billion, together
with the purchases under the additional €120 billion temporary envelope until the end of the year. The Governing Council
continues to expect monthly net asset purchases under the APP to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the
accommodative impact of its policy rates, and to end shortly before it starts raising the key ECB interest rates. The
Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities purchased
under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it starts raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any
case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation.

(4) The Governing Council will also continue to provide ample liquidity through its refinancing operations. In particular, the
latest operation in the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) has registered a very high
take-up of funds, supporting bank lending to firms and households.

The Governing Council continues to stand ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation
moves towards its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press conference starting
at 14:30 CET today.

CONTACT
European Central Bank

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.mp200910~f4a8da495e.en.html

Page 1 of 2

Monetary policy decisions

17/02/23, 19:05

Sonnemannstrasse 20

Directorate General
Communications


 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Reproduction is permitted provided that the
source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Copyright 2023, European Central Bank

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.mp200910~f4a8da495e.en.html

Page 2 of 2

