Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 

14 April 2022 

Monetary policy decisions 

Russia’s aggression in Ukraine is causing enormous suffering. It is also affecting the economy, in 

Europe and beyond. The conflict and the associated uncertainty are weighing heavily on the 

confidence of businesses and consumers. Trade disruptions are leading to new shortages of materials 

and inputs. Surging energy and commodity prices are reducing demand and holding back production. 

How the economy develops will crucially depend on how the conflict evolves, on the impact of current 

sanctions and on possible further measures. At the same time, economic activity is still being 

supported by the reopening of the economy after the crisis phase of the pandemic. Inflation has 

increased significantly and will remain high over the coming months, mainly because of the sharp rise 

in energy costs. Inflation pressures have intensified across many sectors.   

At today’s meeting the Governing Council judged that the incoming data since its last meeting 

reinforce its expectation that net asset purchases under its asset purchase programme should be 

concluded in the third quarter. Looking ahead, the ECB’s monetary policy will depend on the incoming 

data and the Governing Council’s evolving assessment of the outlook. In the current conditions of high 

uncertainty, the Governing Council will maintain optionality, gradualism and flexibility in the conduct of 

monetary policy. The Governing Council will take whatever action is needed to fulfil the ECB’s 

mandate to pursue price stability and to contribute to safeguarding financial stability. 

Asset purchase programme (APP) 

Monthly net purchases under the APP will amount to €40 billion in April, €30 billion in May and €20 

billion in June. At today’s meeting the Governing Council judged that the incoming data since its last 

meeting reinforce its expectation that net asset purchases under the APP should be concluded in the 

third quarter. The calibration of net purchases for the third quarter will be data-dependent and reflect 

the Governing Council’s evolving assessment of the outlook.   

European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications, Global Media Relations Division 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 

The Governing Council also intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing 

securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it starts raising 

the key ECB interest rates and, in any case, for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity 

conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation. 

Key ECB interest rates

The interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility 

and the deposit facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively. 

Any adjustments to the key ECB interest rates will take place some time after the end of the 

Governing Council’s net purchases under the APP and will be gradual. The path for the key ECB 

interest rates will continue to be determined by the Governing Council’s forward guidance and by its 

strategic commitment to stabilise inflation at 2% over the medium term. Accordingly, the Governing 

Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present levels until it sees inflation 

reaching 2% well ahead of the end of its projection horizon and durably for the rest of the projection 

horizon, and it judges that realised progress in underlying inflation is sufficiently advanced to be 

consistent with inflation stabilising at 2% over the medium term.   

Pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 

The Governing Council intends to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased 

under the PEPP until at least the end of 2024. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will 

be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate monetary policy stance. 

In the event of renewed market fragmentation related to the pandemic, PEPP reinvestments can be 

adjusted flexibly across time, asset classes and jurisdictions at any time. This could include 

purchasing bonds issued by the Hellenic Republic over and above rollovers of redemptions in order to 

avoid an interruption of purchases in that jurisdiction, which could impair the transmission of monetary 

policy to the Greek economy while it is still recovering from the fallout from the pandemic. Net 

purchases under the PEPP could also be resumed, if necessary, to counter negative shocks related to 

the pandemic. 

Refinancing operations 

The Governing Council will continue to monitor bank funding conditions and ensure that the maturing 

of operations under the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) does 

not hamper the smooth transmission of its monetary policy. The Governing Council will also regularly 

assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its monetary policy stance. As announced, 

it expects the special conditions applicable under TLTRO III to end in June this year. The Governing 

Council will also assess the appropriate calibration of its two-tier system for reserve remuneration so 

that the negative interest rate policy does not limit banks’ intermediation capacity in an environment of 

ample excess liquidity. 

*** 

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate, incorporating 

flexibility if warranted, to ensure that inflation stabilises at its 2% target over the medium term. The 

pandemic has shown that, under stressed conditions, flexibility in the design and conduct of asset 

purchases has helped to counter the impaired transmission of monetary policy and made the 

Governing Council’s efforts to achieve its goal more effective. Within the Governing Council’s 

mandate, under stressed conditions, flexibility will remain an element of monetary policy whenever 

threats to monetary policy transmission jeopardise the attainment of price stability. 

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 

conference starting at 14:30 CET today. 

Monetary Policy Statement 

Press conference 

Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 

Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 

Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine is causing enormous suffering. It is also affecting the economy, 

in Europe and beyond. The conflict and the associated uncertainty are weighing heavily on the 

confidence of businesses and consumers. Trade disruptions are leading to new shortages of materials 

and inputs. Surging energy and commodity prices are reducing demand and holding back production. 

How the economy develops will crucially depend on how the conflict evolves, on the impact of current 

sanctions and on possible further measures. At the same time, economic activity is still being 

supported by the reopening of the economy after the crisis phase of the pandemic. Inflation has 

increased significantly and will remain high over the coming months, mainly because of the sharp rise 

in energy costs. Inflation pressures have intensified across many sectors.   

At today’s meeting we judged that the incoming data since our last meeting reinforce our expectation 

that net asset purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) should be concluded in the third 

quarter. Looking ahead, our monetary policy will depend on the incoming data and our evolving 

assessment of the outlook. In the current conditions of high uncertainty, we will maintain optionality, 

gradualism and flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy. The Governing Council will take whatever 

action is needed to fulfil the ECB’s mandate to pursue price stability and to contribute to safeguarding 

financial stability. 

I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing, and will then 

explain our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 

Economic activity 

The euro area economy grew by 0.3 per cent in the final quarter of 2021. It is estimated that growth 

remained weak during the first quarter of 2022, largely owing to pandemic-related restrictions. 

Several factors point to slow growth also in the period ahead. The war is already weighing on the 

confidence of businesses and consumers, including through the uncertainty it brings. With energy and 

commodity prices rising sharply, households are facing a higher cost of living and firms are confronted 

with higher production costs. The war has created new bottlenecks, while a new set of pandemic 

measures in Asia is contributing to supply chain difficulties. Some sectors face growing difficulties in 

sourcing their inputs, which is disrupting production. However, there are also offsetting factors 

underpinning the ongoing recovery, such as compensatory fiscal measures and the possibility for 

households to draw on savings they accumulated during the pandemic. Moreover, the reopening of 

those sectors most affected by the pandemic and a strong labour market with more people in jobs will 

continue to support incomes and spending.   

Fiscal and monetary policy support remains critical, especially in this difficult geopolitical situation. In 

addition, the successful implementation of the investment and reform plans under the Next Generation 

EU programme will accelerate the energy and green transitions. This should help enhance long-term 

growth and resilience in the euro area. 

Inflation 

Inflation increased to 7.5 per cent in March, from 5.9 per cent in February. Energy prices were driven 

higher after the outbreak of the war and now stand 45 per cent above their level one year ago. They 

continue to be the main reason for the high rate of inflation. Market-based indicators suggest that 

energy prices will stay high in the near term but will then moderate to some extent. Food prices have 

also increased sharply. This is due to elevated transportation and production costs, notably the higher 

price of fertilisers, which are in part related to the war in Ukraine.   

Price rises have become more widespread. Energy costs are pushing up prices across many sectors. 

Supply bottlenecks and the normalisation of demand as the economy reopens also continue to put 

upward pressure on prices. Measures of underlying inflation have risen to levels above two per cent in 

recent months. It is uncertain how persistent the rise in these indicators will be, given the role of 

temporary pandemic-related factors and the indirect effects of higher energy prices. 

The labour market continues to improve, with unemployment having fallen to a historical low of 6.8 per 

cent in February. Job postings across many sectors still signal robust demand for labour, yet wage 

growth remains muted overall. Over time the return of the economy to full capacity should support 

faster growth in wages. While various measures of longer-term inflation expectations derived from 

financial markets and from expert surveys largely stand at around two per cent, initial signs of above-

target revisions in those measures warrant close monitoring.   

Risk assessment 

The downside risks to the growth outlook have increased substantially as a result of the war in 

Ukraine. While risks relating to the pandemic have declined, the war may have an even stronger effect 

on economic sentiment and could further worsen supply-side constraints. Persistently high energy 

costs, together with a loss of confidence, could drag down demand and restrain consumption and 

investment more than expected.   

The upside risks surrounding the inflation outlook have also intensified, especially in the near term. 

The risks to the medium-term inflation outlook include above-target moves in inflation expectations, 

higher than anticipated wage rises and a durable worsening of supply-side conditions. However, if 

demand were to weaken over the medium term, it would lower pressure on prices.   

Financial and monetary conditions 

Financial markets have been highly volatile since the war began and financial sanctions were 

imposed. Market interest rates have increased in response to the changing outlook for monetary 

policy, the macroeconomic environment and inflation dynamics. Bank funding costs have continued to 

increase. At the same time, so far there have been no severe strains in money markets, nor liquidity 

shortages in the euro area banking system.   

Although remaining at low levels, bank lending rates for firms and households have started to reflect 

the increase in market interest rates. Lending to households is holding up, especially for house 

purchases. Lending flows to firms have stabilised.   

Our most recent bank lending survey reports that credit standards for loans to firms and for housing 

loans tightened overall in the first quarter of the year, as lenders are becoming more concerned about 

the risks facing their customers in an uncertain environment. Credit standards are expected to tighten 

further in the coming months, as banks factor in the adverse economic impact of Russia’s aggression 

towards Ukraine and higher energy prices. 

Conclusion 

Summing up, the war in Ukraine is severely affecting the euro area economy and has significantly 

increased uncertainty. The impact of the war on the economy will depend on how the conflict evolves, 

on the effect of current sanctions and on possible further measures. Inflation has increased 

significantly and will remain high over the coming months, mainly because of the sharp rise in energy 

costs. We are very attentive to the current uncertainties and are closely monitoring the incoming data 

in relation to their implications for the medium-term inflation outlook. The calibration of our policies will 

remain data-dependent and reflect our evolving assessment of the outlook. We stand ready to adjust 

all of our instruments within our mandate, incorporating flexibility if warranted, to ensure that inflation 

stabilises at our two per cent target over the medium term.   

We are now ready to take your questions. 

 
 
 
