Combines monetary policy decisions and 
statement 

15 December 2022   

Monetary policy decisions 

The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points and, 

based on the substantial upward revision to the inflation outlook, expects to raise them further. In 

particular, the Governing Council judges that interest rates will still have to rise significantly at a steady 

pace to reach levels that are sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to the 2% 

medium-term target. Keeping interest rates at restrictive levels will over time reduce inflation by 

dampening demand and will also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation 

expectations. The Governing Council’s future policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent 

and follow a meeting-by-meeting approach.   

The key ECB interest rates are the Governing Council’s primary tool for setting the monetary policy 

stance. The Governing Council today also discussed principles for normalising the Eurosystem’s 

monetary policy securities holdings. From the beginning of March 2023 onwards, the asset purchase 

programme (APP) portfolio will decline at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem will 

not reinvest all of the principal payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 

billion per month on average until the end of the second quarter of 2023 and its subsequent pace will 

be determined over time.   

At its February meeting the Governing Council will announce the detailed parameters for reducing the 

APP holdings. The Governing Council will regularly reassess the pace of the APP portfolio reduction 

to ensure it remains consistent with the overall monetary policy strategy and stance, to preserve 

market functioning, and to maintain firm control over short-term money market conditions. By the end 

of 2023, the Governing Council will also review its operational framework for steering short-term 

interest rates, which will provide information regarding the endpoint of the balance sheet normalisation 

process. 

European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 

 
 
 
 
The Governing Council decided to raise interest rates today, and expects to raise them significantly 

further, because inflation remains far too high and is projected to stay above the target for too long. 

According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, inflation was 10.0% in November, slightly lower than the 10.6% 

recorded in October. The decline resulted mainly from lower energy price inflation. Food price inflation 

and underlying price pressures across the economy have strengthened and will persist for some time. 

Amid exceptional uncertainty, Eurosystem staff have significantly revised up their inflation projections. 

They now see average inflation reaching 8.4% in 2022 before decreasing to 6.3% in 2023, with 

inflation expected to decline markedly over the course of the year. Inflation is then projected to 

average 3.4% in 2024 and 2.3% in 2025. Inflation excluding energy and food is projected to be 3.9% 

on average in 2022 and to rise to 4.2% in 2023, before falling to 2.8% in 2024 and 2.4% in 2025. 

The euro area economy may contract in the current quarter and the next quarter, owing to the energy 

crisis, high uncertainty, weakening global economic activity and tighter financing conditions. According 

to the latest Eurosystem staff projections, a recession would be relatively short-lived and shallow. 

Growth is nonetheless expected to be subdued next year and has been revised down significantly 

compared with the previous projections. Beyond the near term, growth is projected to recover as the 

current headwinds fade. Overall, the Eurosystem staff projections now see the economy growing by 

3.4% in 2022, 0.5% in 2023, 1.9% in 2024 and 1.8% in 2025. 

Key ECB interest rates 

The Governing Council decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points. 

Accordingly, the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal 

lending facility and the deposit facility will be increased to 2.50%, 2.75% and 2.00% respectively, with 

effect from 21 December 2022. 

Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 

The Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing 

securities purchased under the APP until the end of February 2023. Subsequently, the APP portfolio 

will decline at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem will not reinvest all of the principal 

payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 billion per month on average until 

the end of the second quarter of 2023 and its subsequent pace will be determined over time. 

As concerns the PEPP, the Governing Council intends to reinvest the principal payments from 

maturing securities purchased under the programme until at least the end of 2024. In any case, the 

 
 
future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate 

monetary policy stance. 

The Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions coming due in the 

PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related 

to the pandemic. 

Refinancing operations 

As banks are repaying the amounts borrowed under the targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 

the Governing Council will regularly assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its 

monetary policy stance.   

*** 

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 

inflation returns to its 2% target over the medium term. The Transmission Protection Instrument is 

available to counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the 

transmission of monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to 

more effectively deliver on its price stability mandate. 

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 

conference starting at 14:45 CET today.   

 
 
 
 
Monetary policy statement 

Press conference 

Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 

Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.   

The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points and, 

based on the substantial upward revision to the inflation outlook, we expect to raise them further. In 

particular, we judge that interest rates will still have to rise significantly at a steady pace to reach levels 

that are sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term 

target. Keeping interest rates at restrictive levels will over time reduce inflation by dampening demand 

and will also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations. Our future 

policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and follow a meeting-by-meeting approach.   

The key ECB interest rates are our primary tool for setting the monetary policy stance. The Governing 

Council today also discussed principles for normalising the Eurosystem’s monetary policy securities 

holdings. From the beginning of March 2023 onwards, the asset purchase programme (APP) portfolio 

will decline at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem will not reinvest all of the principal 

payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 billion per month on average until 

the end of the second quarter of 2023 and its subsequent pace will be determined over time.   

At its February meeting the Governing Council will announce the detailed parameters for reducing the 

APP holdings. The Governing Council will regularly reassess the pace of the APP portfolio reduction 

to ensure it remains consistent with the overall monetary policy strategy and stance, to preserve 

market functioning, and to maintain firm control over short-term money market conditions. By the end 

of 2023, we will also review our operational framework for steering short-term interest rates, which will 

provide information regarding the endpoint of the balance sheet normalisation process. 

We decided to raise interest rates today, and expect to raise them significantly further, because 

inflation remains far too high and is projected to stay above our target for too long. According to 

Eurostat’s flash estimate, inflation was 10.0 per cent in November, slightly lower than the 10.6 per cent 

recorded in October. The decline resulted mainly from lower energy price inflation. Food price inflation 

and underlying price pressures across the economy have strengthened and will persist for some time. 

Amid exceptional uncertainty, Eurosystem staff have significantly revised up their inflation projections. 

They now see average inflation reaching 8.4 per cent in 2022 before decreasing to 6.3 per cent in 

2023, with inflation expected to decline markedly over the course of the year. Inflation is then 

 
 
projected to average 3.4 per cent in 2024 and 2.3 per cent in 2025. Inflation excluding energy and 

food is projected to be 3.9 per cent on average in 2022 and to rise to 4.2 per cent in 2023, before 

falling to 2.8 per cent in 2024 and 2.4 per cent in 2025. 

The euro area economy may contract in the current quarter and the next quarter, owing to the energy 

crisis, high uncertainty, weakening global economic activity and tighter financing conditions. According 

to the latest Eurosystem staff projections, a recession would be relatively short-lived and shallow. 

Growth is nonetheless expected to be subdued next year and has been revised down significantly 

compared with the previous projections. Beyond the near term, growth is projected to recover as the 

current headwinds fade. Overall, the Eurosystem staff projections now see the economy growing by 

3.4 per cent in 2022, 0.5 per cent in 2023, 1.9 per cent in 2024 and 1.8 per cent in 2025. 

The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.   

I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 

our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 

Economic activity 

Economic growth in the euro area slowed to 0.3 per cent in the third quarter of the year. High inflation 

and tighter financing conditions are dampening spending and production by reducing real household 

incomes and pushing up costs for firms. 

The world economy is also slowing, in a context of continued geopolitical uncertainty, especially owing 

to Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and its people, and tighter financing conditions worldwide. 

The past deterioration in the terms of trade, reflecting the faster rise in import prices than in export 

prices, continues to weigh on purchasing power in the euro area. 

On the positive side, employment increased by 0.3 per cent in the third quarter, and unemployment hit 

a new historical low of 6.5 per cent in October. Rising wages are set to restore some lost purchasing 

power, supporting consumption. As the economy weakens, however, job creation is likely to slow, and 

unemployment could rise over the coming quarters.   

Fiscal support measures to shield the economy from the impact of high energy prices should be 

temporary, targeted and tailored to preserving incentives to consume less energy. Fiscal measures 

falling short of these principles are likely to exacerbate inflationary pressures, which would necessitate 

a stronger monetary policy response. Moreover, in line with the EU’s economic governance 

framework, fiscal policies should be oriented towards making our economy more productive and 

gradually bringing down high public debt. Policies to enhance the euro area’s supply capacity, 

 
 
especially in the energy sector, can help reduce price pressures in the medium term. To that end, 

governments should swiftly implement their investment and structural reform plans under the Next 

Generation EU programme. The reform of the EU’s economic governance framework should be 

concluded rapidly. 

Inflation 

Inflation declined to 10.0 per cent in November, mainly on the back of lower energy price inflation, 

while services inflation also edged down. Food price inflation rose further to 13.6 per cent, however, 

as high input costs in food production were passed through to consumer prices. 

Price pressures remain strong across sectors, partly as a result of the impact of high energy costs 

throughout the economy. Inflation excluding energy and food was unchanged in November, at 5.0 per 

cent, and other measures of underlying inflation are also high. Fiscal measures to compensate 

households for high energy prices and inflation are set to dampen inflation over next year but will raise 

it once they are withdrawn. 

Supply bottlenecks are gradually easing, although their effects are still contributing to inflation, pushing 

up goods prices in particular. The same holds true for the lifting of pandemic-related restrictions: while 

weakening, the effect of pent-up demand is still driving up prices, especially in the services sector. The 

depreciation of the euro this year is also continuing to feed through to consumer prices. 

Wage growth is strengthening, supported by robust labour markets and some catch-up in wages to 

compensate workers for high inflation. As these factors are set to remain in place, the Eurosystem 

staff projections see wages growing at rates well above historical averages and pushing up inflation 

throughout the projection period. Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations currently stand 

at around two per cent, although further above-target revisions to some indicators warrant continued 

monitoring. 

Risk assessment   

Risks to the economic growth outlook are on the downside, especially in the near term. The war 

against Ukraine remains a significant downside risk to the economy. Energy and food costs could also 

remain persistently higher than expected. There could be an additional drag on growth in the euro 

area if the world economy were to weaken more sharply than we expect. 

The risks to the inflation outlook are primarily on the upside. In the near term, existing pipeline 

pressures could lead to stronger than expected rises in retail prices for energy and food. Over the 

 
 
medium term, risks stem primarily from domestic factors such as a persistent rise in inflation 

expectations above our target or higher than anticipated wage rises. By contrast, a decline in energy 

costs or a further weakening of demand would lower price pressures. 

Financial and monetary conditions 

As we tighten monetary policy, borrowing is becoming more expensive for firms and households. Bank 

lending to firms remains robust, as firms replace bonds with bank loans and use credit to finance the 

higher costs of production and investment. Households are borrowing less, because of tighter credit 

standards, rising interest rates, worsening prospects for the housing market and lower consumer 

confidence.   

In line with our monetary policy strategy, twice a year the Governing Council assesses in depth the 

interrelation between monetary policy and financial stability. The financial stability environment has 

deteriorated since our last review in June 2022 owing to a weaker economy and rising credit risk. In 

addition, sovereign vulnerabilities have risen amid the weaker economic outlook and weaker fiscal 

positions. Tighter financing conditions would mitigate the build-up of financial vulnerabilities and lower 

tail risks to inflation over the medium term, at the cost of a higher risk of systemic stress and greater 

downside risks to growth in the short term. In addition, the liquidity needs of non-bank financial 

institutions may amplify market volatility. At the same time, euro area banks have comfortable levels of 

capital, which helps to reduce the side effects of tighter monetary policy on financial stability. 

Macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence in preserving financial stability and addressing 

medium-term vulnerabilities. 

Conclusion   

Summing up, we have today raised the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points and, based on 

the substantial upward revision to our inflation outlook, we expect to raise them further. In particular, 

we judge that interest rates will still have to rise significantly at a steady pace to reach levels that are 

sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target. 

Keeping interest rates at restrictive levels will over time reduce inflation by dampening demand and 

will also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations. Moreover, from the 

beginning of March 2023 onwards, the APP portfolio will decline at a measured and predictable pace, 

as the Eurosystem will not reinvest all of the principal payments from maturing securities.   

 
 
Our future policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and determined meeting by 

meeting. We stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 

returns to our medium-term inflation target. 

We are now ready to take your questions. 

 
 
