Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 

16 December 2021 

Monetary policy decisions 

The Governing Council judges that the progress on economic recovery and towards its medium-term 

inflation target permits a step-by-step reduction in the pace of its asset purchases over the coming 

quarters. But monetary accommodation is still needed for inflation to stabilise at the 2% inflation target 

over the medium term. In view of the current uncertainty, the Governing Council needs to maintain 

flexibility and optionality in the conduct of monetary policy. With this is mind, the Governing Council 

took the following decisions: 

Pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 

In the first quarter of 2022, the Governing Council expects to conduct net asset purchases under the 

PEPP at a lower pace than in the previous quarter. It will discontinue net asset purchases under the 

PEPP at the end of March 2022.   

The Governing Council decided to extend the reinvestment horizon for the PEPP. It now intends to 

reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP until at least the 

end of 2024. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference 

with the appropriate monetary policy stance. 

The pandemic has shown that, under stressed conditions, flexibility in the design and conduct of asset 

purchases has helped to counter the impaired transmission of monetary policy and made efforts to 

achieve the Governing Council’s goal more effective. Within our mandate, under stressed conditions, 

flexibility will remain an element of monetary policy whenever threats to monetary policy transmission 

jeopardise the attainment of price stability. In particular, in the event of renewed market fragmentation 

related to the pandemic, PEPP reinvestments can be adjusted flexibly across time, asset classes and 

jurisdictions at any time. This could include purchasing bonds issued by the Hellenic Republic over 

and above rollovers of redemptions in order to avoid an interruption of purchases in that jurisdiction, 

European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications, Global Media Relations Division 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 

 
 
 
which could impair the transmission of monetary policy to the Greek economy while it is still recovering 

from the fallout of the pandemic. Net purchases under the PEPP could also be resumed, if necessary, 

to counter negative shocks related to the pandemic. 

Asset purchase programme (APP) 

In line with a step-by-step reduction in asset purchases and to ensure that the monetary policy stance 

remains consistent with inflation stabilising at its target over the medium term, the Governing Council 

decided on a monthly net purchase pace of €40 billion in the second quarter and €30 billion in the third 

quarter under the APP. From October 2022 onwards, the Governing Council will maintain net asset 

purchases under the APP at a monthly pace of €20 billion for as long as necessary to reinforce the 

accommodative impact of its policy rates. The Governing Council expects net purchases to end shortly 

before it starts raising the key ECB interest rates.   

The Governing Council also intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing 

securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it starts raising 

the key ECB interest rates and, in any case, for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity 

conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation. 

Key ECB interest rates 

The interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility 

and the deposit facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively. 

In support of its symmetric 2% inflation target and in line with its monetary policy strategy, the 

Governing Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels until it 

sees inflation reaching 2% well ahead of the end of its projection horizon and durably for the rest of 

the projection horizon, and it judges that realised progress in underlying inflation is sufficiently 

advanced to be consistent with inflation stabilising at 2% over the medium term. This may also imply a 

transitory period in which inflation is moderately above target. 

Refinancing operations 

The Governing Council will continue to monitor bank funding conditions and ensure that the maturing 

of operations under the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) does 

not hamper the smooth transmission of its monetary policy. The Governing Council will also regularly 

assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its monetary policy stance. As announced, 

 
 
it expects the special conditions applicable under TLTRO III to end in June next year. The Governing 

Council will also assess the appropriate calibration of its two-tier system for reserve remuneration so 

that the negative interest rate policy does not limit banks’ intermediation capacity in an environment of 

ample excess liquidity. 

*** 

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate and in either 

direction, to ensure that inflation stabilises at its 2% target over the medium term.   

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 

conference starting at 14:30 CET today. 

 
 
 
 
Monetary Policy Statement 

Press conference 

Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 

Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.   

The euro area economy continues to recover and the labour market is improving, helped by ample 

policy support. Growth is moderating but we expect activity to pick up again strongly in the course of 

next year. The latest pandemic wave and the Omicron variant have prompted some countries to re-

introduce tighter restrictions. Energy prices have gone up significantly. And in some industries, there 

are shortages of materials, equipment and labour. These factors are restraining economic activity and 

are a headwind for the near-term outlook. However, although the public health crisis is still ongoing, 

many people have been vaccinated and booster campaigns have accelerated. Overall, society has 

become better at coping with the pandemic waves and resulting constraints. This has lessened the 

pandemic impact on the economy. Inflation has risen sharply owing to the surge in energy prices, and 

also because demand is outpacing constrained supply in some sectors. Inflation is expected to remain 

elevated in the near term, but should ease in the course of next year. The inflation outlook has been 

revised up, but inflation is still projected to settle below our two per cent target over the projection 

horizon. 

We judge that the progress on economic recovery and towards our medium-term inflation target 

permits a step-by-step reduction in the pace of our asset purchases over the coming quarters. But 

monetary accommodation is still needed for inflation to stabilise at our two per cent inflation target 

over the medium term. In view of the current uncertainty, we need to maintain flexibility and optionality 

in the conduct of monetary policy. With this is mind, the Governing Council took the following 

decisions: 

First, in the first quarter of 2022, we expect to conduct net asset purchases under the pandemic 

emergency purchase programme (PEPP) at a lower pace than in the previous quarter. We will 

discontinue net asset purchases under the PEPP at the end of March 2022.   

Second, the Governing Council decided to extend the reinvestment horizon for the PEPP. It now 

intends to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP until at 

least the end of 2024. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid 

interference with the appropriate monetary policy stance. 

 
 
Third, the pandemic has shown that, under stressed conditions, flexibility in the design and conduct of 

asset purchases has helped to counter the impaired transmission of our monetary policy and made 

our efforts to achieve our goal more effective. Within our mandate, under stressed conditions, flexibility 

will remain an element of monetary policy whenever threats to monetary policy transmission 

jeopardise the attainment of price stability. In particular, in the event of renewed market fragmentation 

related to the pandemic, PEPP reinvestments can be adjusted flexibly across time, asset classes and 

jurisdictions at any time. This could include purchasing bonds issued by the Hellenic Republic over 

and above rollovers of redemptions in order to avoid an interruption of purchases in that jurisdiction, 

which could impair the transmission of monetary policy to the Greek economy while it is still recovering 

from the fallout of the pandemic. Net purchases under the PEPP could also be resumed, if necessary, 

to counter negative shocks related to the pandemic. 

Fourth, in line with a step-by-step reduction in asset purchases and to ensure that the monetary policy 

stance remains consistent with inflation stabilising at our target over the medium term, we decided on 

a monthly net purchase pace of €40 billion in the second quarter and €30 billion in the third quarter 

under the asset purchase programme (APP). From October 2022 onwards, we will maintain net asset 

purchases under the APP at a monthly pace of €20 billion for as long as necessary to reinforce the 

accommodative impact of our policy rates. We expect net purchases to end shortly before we start 

raising the key ECB interest rates.   

We also confirmed the level of the key ECB interest rates and our forward guidance on the future path 

of policy rates. This is crucial for maintaining the appropriate degree of accommodation to stabilise 

inflation at our two per cent inflation target over the medium term.   

We will continue to monitor bank funding conditions and ensure that the maturing of TLTRO III 

operations does not hamper the smooth transmission of our monetary policy. We will also regularly 

assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to our monetary policy stance. As 

announced, we expect the special conditions applicable under TLTRO III to end in June next year. We 

will also assess the appropriate calibration of our two-tier system for reserve remuneration so that the 

negative interest rate policy does not limit banks’ intermediation capacity in an environment of ample 

excess liquidity. 

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate and in either 

direction, to ensure that inflation stabilises at its two per cent target over the medium term.   

I will now outline in more detail how we see developments in the economy and inflation. I will then outline 

our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.   

 
 
Economic activity 

We expect the economic recovery to continue, driven by robust domestic demand. The labour market 

is improving, with more people having jobs and fewer in job retention schemes. This supports the 

prospect of rising household income and consumption. The savings built up during the pandemic will 

also support consumption. The current fiscal and monetary policy support, together with a continued 

global recovery, should support growth. 

Economic activity has been moderating over the final quarter of the year and this slower growth is 

likely to extend into the early part of next year. We now expect output to exceed its pre-pandemic level 

in the first quarter of 2022. 

To cope with the current pandemic wave, some euro area countries have reintroduced tighter 

containment measures. This could delay the recovery, especially in travel, tourism, hospitality and 

entertainment. The pandemic is weighing on consumer and business confidence and the spread of 

new virus variants is creating extra uncertainty. In addition, rising energy costs are a headwind for 

consumption.   

Shortages of equipment, materials and labour in some sectors are hampering production of 

manufactured goods, causing delays in construction and slowing down the recovery in some parts of 

the service sector. These bottlenecks will still be with us for some time, but they should ease during 

2022.   

Looking ahead, we expect growth to rebound strongly over the course of 2022. Our new Eurosystem 

staff projections foresee annual real GDP growth at 5.1 per cent in 2021, 4.2 per cent in 2022, 2.9 per 

cent in 2023 and 1.6 per cent in 2024. Compared with our September staff projections, the outlook has 

been revised down for 2022 and up for 2023. 

Targeted and growth-friendly fiscal measures should continue to complement monetary policy. This 

support will also help the economy adjust to the structural changes that are under way. An effective 

implementation of the Next Generation EU programme and the “Fit for 55” package will contribute to a 

stronger, greener and more even recovery across euro area countries. 

Inflation 

Inflation increased further to 4.9 per cent in November. It will remain above two per cent for most of 

2022. Inflation is expected to remain elevated in the near term, but we expect it to decline in the 

course of next year.   

 
 
The upswing in inflation primarily reflects a sharp rise in prices for fuel, gas and electricity. In 

November, energy inflation accounted for more than half of headline inflation. Demand also continues 

to outpace constrained supply in certain sectors. The consequences are especially visible in the prices 

of durable goods and those consumer services that have recently reopened. Base effects related to 

the end of the VAT cut in Germany are still contributing to higher inflation, but only until the end of the 

year. 

There is uncertainty as to how long it will take for these issues to resolve. But, in the course of 2022, 

we expect energy prices to stabilise, consumption patterns to normalise, and price pressures 

stemming from global supply bottlenecks to subside.   

Over time, the gradual return of the economy to full capacity and further improvements in the labour 

market should support faster growth in wages. Market and survey-based measures of longer-term 

inflation expectations have remained broadly stable since our last monetary policy meeting in October. 

But overall, these have moved closer to two per cent in recent months. These factors will help 

underlying inflation to move up and bring headline inflation up to our target over the medium term. 

Our new staff projections foresee annual inflation at 2.6 per cent in 2021, 3.2 per cent in 2022, 1.8 per 

cent in 2023, and 1.8 per cent in 2024 – significantly higher than in the previous projections in 

September. Inflation excluding food and energy is projected to average 1.4 per cent in 2021, 1.9 per 

cent in 2022, 1.7 per cent in 2023, and 1.8 per cent in 2024, also higher than in the September 

projections. 

Risk assessment   

We see the risks to the economic outlook as broadly balanced. Economic activity could outperform our 

expectations if consumers become more confident and save less than expected. By contrast, the 

recent worsening of the pandemic, including the spread of new variants, could be a more persistent 

drag on growth. The future path of energy prices and the pace at which supply bottlenecks are 

resolved are risks to the recovery and to the outlook for inflation. If price pressures feed through into 

higher than anticipated wage rises or the economy returns more quickly to full capacity, inflation could 

turn out to be higher. 

Financial and monetary conditions 

Market interest rates have remained broadly stable since the October Governing Council meeting. 

Bank lending rates for firms and households remain at historically low levels. Overall, financing 

 
 
conditions for the economy remain favourable. Lending to firms is partly driven by short-term funding 

needs stemming from supply bottlenecks that increase their expenses for inventory and working 

capital. At the same time, corporate demand for loans remains moderate because of retained earnings 

and generous cash holdings, as well as high debt. Lending to households remains robust – driven by 

demand for mortgages.   

Euro area banks have further strengthened their balance sheets thanks to higher capital ratios and 

fewer non-performing loans. Banks are now as profitable as they were before the pandemic. Bank 

funding conditions remain favourable overall.   

In line with our new monetary policy strategy, twice a year the Governing Council assesses in-depth 

the interrelation between monetary policy and financial stability. An accommodative monetary policy 

underpins growth, which supports the balance sheets of companies and financial institutions, as well 

as preventing risks of market fragmentation. At the same time, the impact of accommodative monetary 

policy on property markets and financial markets warrants close monitoring as a number of medium-

term vulnerabilities have intensified. Still, macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence in 

preserving financial stability and addressing medium-term vulnerabilities. 

Conclusion 

Summing up, the euro area economy continues to recover, despite a slowdown in the near term. The 

sharp increase in energy prices and demand outpacing constrained supply in some sectors are 

pushing up inflation. Inflation will remain above our target for most of 2022, but is likely to ease in the 

course of next year. At the same time, given the progress on economic recovery and towards our 

medium-term inflation target, we can discontinue net purchases under the PEPP in March. But 

monetary accommodation is still needed – including net purchases under the APP and our forward 

guidance on interest rates – for inflation to stabilise at our two per cent inflation target over the 

medium term.   

We are now ready to take your questions. 

 
 
 
