Monetary policy decisions

17/02/23, 19:03

PRESS RELEASE

Monetary policy decisions

22 July 2021

In its recent strategy review, the Governing Council agreed a symmetric inflation target of two per cent over the medium
term. The key ECB interest rates have been close to their lower bound for some time and the medium-term outlook for
inflation is still well below the Governing Council’s target. In these conditions, the Governing Council today revised its
forward guidance on interest rates. It did so to underline its commitment to maintain a persistently accommodative
monetary policy stance to meet its inflation target.

In support of its symmetric two per cent inflation target and in line with its monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council
expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels until it sees inflation reaching two per cent
well ahead of the end of its projection horizon and durably for the rest of the projection horizon, and it judges that realised
progress in underlying inflation is sufficiently advanced to be consistent with inflation stabilising at two per cent over the
medium term. This may also imply a transitory period in which inflation is moderately above target.

Having confirmed its June assessment of financing conditions and the inflation outlook, the Governing Council continues
to expect purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) over the current quarter to be
conducted at a significantly higher pace than during the first months of the year.

The Governing Council also confirmed its other measures to support its price stability mandate, namely the level of the
key ECB interest rates, its purchases under the asset purchase programme (APP), its reinvestment policies and its
longer-term refinancing operations. Specifically:

Key ECB interest rates
The interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit
facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively.

In support of its symmetric two per cent inflation target and in line with its monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council
expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels until it sees inflation reaching two per cent
well ahead of the end of its projection horizon and durably for the rest of the projection horizon, and it judges that realised
progress in underlying inflation is sufficiently advanced to be consistent with inflation stabilising at two per cent over the
medium term. This may also imply a transitory period in which inflation is moderately above target.

Asset purchase programme (APP)
Net purchases under the APP will continue at a monthly pace of €20 billion. The Governing Council continues to expect
monthly net asset purchases under the APP to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the accommodative impact of its
policy rates, and to end shortly before it starts raising the key ECB interest rates.

The Governing Council also intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it starts raising the key ECB interest rates,
and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation.

Pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP)
The Governing Council will continue to conduct net asset purchases under the PEPP with a total envelope of €1,850
billion until at least the end of March 2022 and, in any case, until it judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over.

As the incoming information confirmed the joint assessment of financing conditions and the inflation outlook carried out at
the June monetary policy meeting, the Governing Council continues to expect purchases under the PEPP over the
current quarter to be conducted at a significantly higher pace than during the first months of the year.

The Governing Council will purchase flexibly according to market conditions and with a view to preventing a tightening of
financing conditions that is inconsistent with countering the downward impact of the pandemic on the projected path of

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb.mp210722~48dc3b436b.en.html

Page 1 of 2

Monetary policy decisions

17/02/23, 19:03

inflation. In addition, the flexibility of purchases over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions will continue to
support the smooth transmission of monetary policy. If favourable financing conditions can be maintained with asset
purchase flows that do not exhaust the envelope over the net purchase horizon of the PEPP, the envelope need not be
used in full. Equally, the envelope can be recalibrated if required to maintain favourable financing conditions to help
counter the negative pandemic shock to the path of inflation.

The Governing Council will continue to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the
PEPP until at least the end of 2023. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid
interference with the appropriate monetary policy stance.

Refinancing operations
The Governing Council will continue to provide ample liquidity through its refinancing operations. In particular, the third
series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) remains an attractive source of funding for banks,
supporting bank lending to firms and households.

***

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation stabilises at its
two per cent target over the medium term.

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press conference starting
at 14:30 CET today.

CONTACT
European Central Bank

Reproduction is permitted provided that the
source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Copyright 2023, European Central Bank

Sonnemannstrasse 20

Directorate General
Communications


 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb.mp210722~48dc3b436b.en.html

Page 2 of 2

