Monetary policy decisions

18/02/23, 22:28

PRESS RELEASE · 30 April 2020

Monetary policy decisions

At today’s meeting the Governing Council of the ECB took the following monetary policy decisions:

(1) The conditions on the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) have been further eased. Specifically,
the Governing Council decided to reduce the interest rate on TLTRO III operations during the period from June 2020 to
June 2021 to 50 basis points below the average interest rate on the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations prevailing
over the same period. Moreover, for counterparties whose eligible net lending reaches the lending performance threshold,
the interest rate over the period from June 2020 to June 2021 will now be 50 basis points below the average deposit
facility rate prevailing over the same period.

(2) A new series of non-targeted pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs) will be conducted
to support liquidity conditions in the euro area financial system and contribute to preserving the smooth functioning of
money markets by providing an effective liquidity backstop. The PELTROs consist of seven additional refinancing
operations commencing in May 2020 and maturing in a staggered sequence between July and September 2021 in line
with the duration of the collateral easing measures. They will be carried out as fixed rate tender procedures with full
allotment, with an interest rate that is 25 basis points below the average rate on the main refinancing operations
prevailing over the life of each PELTRO.

(3) Since the end of March, purchases have been conducted under the Governing Council’s new pandemic emergency
purchase programme (PEPP), which has an overall envelope of €750 billion, to ease the overall monetary policy stance
and to counter the severe risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism and the outlook for the euro area posed
by the coronavirus pandemic. These purchases will continue to be conducted in a flexible manner over time, across asset
classes and among jurisdictions. The Governing Council will conduct net asset purchases under the PEPP until it judges
that the coronavirus crisis phase is over, but in any case until the end of this year.

(4) Moreover, net purchases under the asset purchase programme (APP) will continue at a monthly pace of €20 billion,
together with the purchases under the additional €120 billion temporary envelope until the end of the year. The Governing
Council continues to expect monthly net asset purchases under the APP to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the
accommodative impact of its policy rates, and to end shortly before it starts raising the key ECB interest rates.

(5) Reinvestments of the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP will continue, in full, for
an extended period of time past the date when the Governing Council starts raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any
case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation.

(6) The interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the
deposit facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively. The Governing Council expects the key
ECB interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels until it has seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a
level sufficiently close to, but below, 2% within its projection horizon, and such convergence has been consistently
reflected in underlying inflation dynamics.

The Governing Council is fully prepared to increase the size of the PEPP and adjust its composition, by as much as
necessary and for as long as needed. In any case, it stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to
ensure that inflation moves towards its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.

Further details on the amendments made to the terms of TLTRO III and on the new PELTROs will be published in
dedicated press releases this afternoon at 15:30 CET.

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press conference starting
at 14:30 CET today.

CONTACT

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.mp200430~1eaa128265.en.html

Page 1 of 2

Monetary policy decisions

18/02/23, 22:28

European Central Bank

Reproduction is permitted provided that the
source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Copyright 2023, European Central Bank

Sonnemannstrasse 20

Directorate General
Communications


 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.mp200430~1eaa128265.en.html

Page 2 of 2

