Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 

8 September 2022 

Monetary policy decisions 

The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis points. 

This major step frontloads the transition from the prevailing highly accommodative level of policy rates 

towards levels that will ensure the timely return of inflation to the ECB’s 2% medium-term target. 

Based on its current assessment, over the next several meetings the Governing Council expects to 

raise interest rates further to dampen demand and guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift 

in inflation expectations. The Governing Council will regularly re-evaluate its policy path in light of 

incoming information and the evolving inflation outlook. The Governing Council’s future policy rate 

decisions will continue to be data-dependent and follow a meeting-by-meeting approach. 

The Governing Council took today’s decision, and expects to raise interest rates further, because 

inflation remains far too high and is likely to stay above target for an extended period. According to 

Eurostat’s flash estimate, inflation reached 9.1% in August. Soaring energy and food prices, demand 

pressures in some sectors owing to the reopening of the economy, and supply bottlenecks are still 

driving up inflation. Price pressures have continued to strengthen and broaden across the economy 

and inflation may rise further in the near term. As the current drivers of inflation fade over time and the 

normalisation of monetary policy works its way through to the economy and price-setting, inflation will 

come down. Looking ahead, ECB staff have significantly revised up their inflation projections and 

inflation is now expected to average 8.1% in 2022, 5.5% in 2023 and 2.3% in 2024.   

After a rebound in the first half of 2022, recent data point to a substantial slowdown in euro area 

economic growth, with the economy expected to stagnate later in the year and in the first quarter of 

2023. Very high energy prices are reducing the purchasing power of people’s incomes and, although 

supply bottlenecks are easing, they are still constraining economic activity. In addition, the adverse 

geopolitical situation, especially Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine, is weighing on the 

confidence of businesses and consumers. This outlook is reflected in the latest staff projections for 

economic growth, which have been revised down markedly for the remainder of the current year and 

European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications, Global Media Relations Division 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 

 
 
 
throughout 2023. Staff now expect the economy to grow by 3.1% in 2022, 0.9% in 2023 and 1.9% in 

2024.   

The lasting vulnerabilities caused by the pandemic still pose a risk to the smooth transmission of 

monetary policy. The Governing Council will therefore continue applying flexibility in reinvesting 

redemptions coming due in the pandemic emergency purchase programme portfolio, with a view to 

countering risks to the transmission mechanism related to the pandemic.       

Key ECB interest rates 

The Governing Council decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis points. 

Accordingly, the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal 

lending facility and the deposit facility will be increased to 1.25%, 1.50% and 0.75% respectively, with 

effect from 14 September 2022. 

Following the raising of the deposit facility rate to above zero, the two-tier system for the remuneration 

of excess reserves is no longer necessary. The Governing Council therefore decided today to 

suspend the two-tier system by setting the multiplier to zero. 

Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 

The Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing 

securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it started 

raising the key ECB interest rates and, in any case, for as long as necessary to maintain ample 

liquidity conditions and an appropriate monetary policy stance. 

As concerns the PEPP, the Governing Council intends to reinvest the principal payments from 

maturing securities purchased under the programme until at least the end of 2024. In any case, the 

future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate 

monetary policy stance. 

Redemptions coming due in the PEPP portfolio are being reinvested flexibly, with a view to countering 

risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related to the pandemic. 

Refinancing operations 

The Governing Council will continue to monitor bank funding conditions and ensure that the maturing 

of operations under the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) does 

not hamper the smooth transmission of its monetary policy. The Governing Council will also regularly 

assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its monetary policy stance.   

*** 

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 

inflation stabilises at its 2% target over the medium term. The Transmission Protection Instrument is 

available to counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the 

transmission of monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to 

more effectively deliver on its price stability mandate. 

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 

conference starting at 14:45 CET today. 

 
 
 
Monetary policy statement 

Press conference 

Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 

Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.   

The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis points. 

This major step frontloads the transition from the prevailing highly accommodative level of policy rates 

towards levels that will ensure the timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target. 

Based on our current assessment, over the next several meetings we expect to raise interest rates 

further to dampen demand and guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation 

expectations. We will regularly re-evaluate our policy path in light of incoming information and the 

evolving inflation outlook. Our future policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and 

follow a meeting-by-meeting approach. 

We took today’s decision, and expect to raise interest rates further, because inflation remains far too 

high and is likely to stay above our target for an extended period. According to Eurostat’s flash 

estimate, inflation reached 9.1 per cent in August. Soaring energy and food prices, demand pressures 

in some sectors owing to the reopening of the economy, and supply bottlenecks are still driving up 

inflation. Price pressures have continued to strengthen and broaden across the economy and inflation 

may rise further in the near term. As the current drivers of inflation fade over time and the 

normalisation of our monetary policy works its way through to the economy and price-setting, inflation 

will come down. Looking ahead, ECB staff have significantly revised up their inflation projections and 

inflation is now expected to average 8.1 per cent in 2022, 5.5 per cent in 2023 and 2.3 per cent in 

2024.   

After a rebound in the first half of 2022, recent data point to a substantial slowdown in euro area 

economic growth, with the economy expected to stagnate later in the year and in the first quarter of 

2023. Very high energy prices are reducing the purchasing power of people’s incomes and, although 

supply bottlenecks are easing, they are still constraining economic activity. In addition, the adverse 

geopolitical situation, especially Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine, is weighing on the 

confidence of businesses and consumers. This outlook is reflected in the latest staff projections for 

economic growth, which have been revised down markedly for the remainder of the current year and 

throughout 2023. Staff now expect the economy to grow by 3.1 per cent in 2022, 0.9 per cent in 2023 

and 1.9 per cent in 2024.   

The lasting vulnerabilities caused by the pandemic still pose a risk to the smooth transmission of our 

monetary policy. The Governing Council will therefore continue applying flexibility in reinvesting 

redemptions coming due in the pandemic emergency purchase programme portfolio, with a view to 

countering risks to the transmission mechanism related to the pandemic.   

The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. A separate 

technical press release on the remuneration of government deposits will be published at 15:45 CET. 

I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 

our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 

Economic activity 

The euro area economy grew by 0.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2022, mainly owing to strong 

consumer spending on contact-intensive services, as a result of the lifting of pandemic-related 

restrictions. Over the summer, as people travelled more, countries with large tourism sectors benefited 

especially. At the same time, businesses suffered from high energy costs and continued supply 

bottlenecks, although the latter have been gradually easing.   

While buoyant tourism has been supporting economic growth during the third quarter, we expect the 

economy to slow down substantially over the remainder of this year. There are four main reasons 

behind this. First, high inflation is dampening spending and production throughout the economy, and 

these headwinds are reinforced by gas supply disruptions. Second, the strong rebound in demand for 

services that came with the reopening of the economy will lose steam in the coming months. Third, the 

weakening in global demand, also in the context of tighter monetary policy in many major economies, 

and the worsening terms of trade will mean less support for the euro area economy. Fourth, 
uncertainty remains high and confidence is falling sharply. 

At the same time, the labour market has remained robust, supporting economic activity. Employment 

increased by more than 600,000 people in the second quarter of 2022 and the unemployment rate 

stood at a historical low of 6.6 per cent in July. Total hours worked increased further, by 0.6 per cent, 

in the second quarter of 2022 and have surpassed their pre-pandemic levels. Looking ahead, the 

slowing economy is likely to lead to some increase in the unemployment rate. 

Fiscal support measures to cushion the impact of higher energy prices should be temporary and 

targeted at the most vulnerable households and firms to limit the risk of fuelling inflationary pressures, 

to enhance the efficiency of public spending and to preserve debt sustainability. Structural policies 

should aim at raising the euro area’s growth potential and supporting its resilience. 

Inflation 

Inflation rose further to 9.1 per cent in August. Energy price inflation remained extremely elevated, at 

38.3 per cent, and it was again the dominant component of overall inflation. Market-based indicators 

suggest that, in the near term, oil prices will moderate, while wholesale gas prices will stay 

extraordinarily high. Food price inflation also rose in August, to 10.6 per cent, partly reflecting higher 

input costs related to energy, disruptions of trade in food commodities and adverse weather 

conditions. 

While supply bottlenecks have been easing, these continue to gradually feed through to consumer 

prices and are putting upward pressure on inflation, as is recovering demand in the services sector. 

The depreciation of the euro has also added to the build-up of inflationary pressures. 

Price pressures are spreading across more and more sectors, in part owing to the impact of high 

energy costs across the whole economy. Accordingly, measures of underlying inflation remain at 

elevated levels and the latest staff projections see inflation excluding food and energy reaching 3.9 per 

cent in 2022, 3.4 per cent in 2023 and 2.3 per cent in 2024.   

Resilient labour markets and some catch-up to compensate for higher inflation are likely to support 

growth in wages. At the same time, incoming data and recent wage agreements indicate that wage 

dynamics remain contained overall. Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations currently 

stand at around two per cent, although recent above-target revisions to some indicators warrant 

continued monitoring. 

Risk assessment   

In the context of the slowing global economy, risks to growth are primarily on the downside, in 

particular in the near term. As reflected in the downside scenario in the staff projections, a long-lasting 

war in Ukraine remains a significant risk to growth, especially if firms and households faced rationing 

of energy supplies. In such a situation, confidence could deteriorate further and supply-side 

constraints could worsen again. Energy and food costs could also remain persistently higher than 

expected. A further deterioration in the global economic outlook could be an additional drag on euro 

area external demand. 

The risks to the inflation outlook are primarily on the upside. In the same way as for growth, the major 

risk in the short term is a further disruption of energy supplies. Over the medium term, inflation may 

turn out to be higher than expected because of a persistent worsening of the production capacity of 

the euro area economy, further increases in energy and food prices, a rise in inflation expectations 

above our target, or higher than anticipated wage rises. However, if energy costs were to decline or 

demand were to weaken over the medium term, it would lower pressures on prices. 

Financial and monetary conditions 

Market interest rates have increased in anticipation of further monetary policy normalisation in 

response to the inflation outlook. Credit to firms has become more expensive over recent months, and 

bank lending rates for households now stand at their highest levels in more than five years. In terms of 

volumes, bank lending to firms has so far remained strong, in part reflecting the need to finance high 

production costs and inventory building. Mortgage lending to households is moderating because of 

tightening credit standards, rising borrowing costs and weak consumer confidence.   

Conclusion   

Summing up, we raised the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis points today, and expect to raise 

interest rates further, because inflation remains far too high and is likely to stay above our target for an 

extended period. This major step frontloads the transition from the prevailing highly accommodative 

level of policy rates towards levels that will support a timely return of inflation to our two per cent 

medium-term target.   

Our future policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and follow a meeting-by-meeting 

approach. We stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 

returns to our medium-term inflation target. 

We are now ready to take your questions. 

 
