Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 

9 June 2022 

Monetary policy decisions 

High inflation is a major challenge for all of us. The Governing Council will make sure that inflation 

returns to its 2% target over the medium term. 

In May inflation again rose significantly, mainly because of surging energy and food prices, including 

due to the impact of the war. But inflation pressures have broadened and intensified, with prices for 

many goods and services increasing strongly. Eurosystem staff have revised their baseline inflation 

projections up significantly. These projections indicate that inflation will remain undesirably elevated 

for some time. However, moderating energy costs, the easing of supply disruptions related to the 

pandemic and the normalisation of monetary policy are expected to lead to a decline in inflation. The 

new staff projections foresee annual inflation at 6.8% in 2022, before it is projected to decline to 3.5% 

in 2023 and 2.1% in 2024 – higher than in the March projections. This means that headline inflation at 

the end of the projection horizon is projected to be slightly above the Governing Council’s target. 

Inflation excluding energy and food is projected to average 3.3% in 2022, 2.8% in 2023 and 2.3% in 

2024 – also above the March projections.   

Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine continues to weigh on the economy in Europe and 

beyond. It is disrupting trade, is leading to shortages of materials, and is contributing to high energy 

and commodity prices. These factors will continue to weigh on confidence and dampen growth, 

especially in the near term. However, the conditions are in place for the economy to continue to grow 

on account of the ongoing reopening of the economy, a strong labour market, fiscal support and 

savings built up during the pandemic. Once current headwinds abate, economic activity is expected to 

pick up again. This outlook is broadly reflected in the Eurosystem staff projections, which foresee 

annual real GDP growth at 2.8% in 2022, 2.1% in 2023 and 2.1% in 2024. Compared with the March 

projections, the outlook has been revised down significantly for 2022 and 2023, while for 2024 it has 

been revised up. 

European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications, Global Media Relations Division 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 

 
 
 
On the basis of its updated assessment, the Governing Council decided to take further steps in 

normalising its monetary policy. Throughout this process, the Governing Council will maintain 

optionality, data-dependence, gradualism and flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.   

Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 

The Governing Council decided to end net asset purchases under its asset purchase programme 

(APP) as of 1 July 2022. The Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal 

payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the 

date when it starts raising the key ECB interest rates and, in any case, for as long as necessary to 

maintain ample liquidity conditions and an appropriate monetary policy stance. 

As concerns the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP), the Governing Council intends 

to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the programme until at 

least the end of 2024. In any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid 

interference with the appropriate monetary policy stance. 

In the event of renewed market fragmentation related to the pandemic, PEPP reinvestments can be 

adjusted flexibly across time, asset classes and jurisdictions at any time. This could include 

purchasing bonds issued by the Hellenic Republic over and above rollovers of redemptions in order to 

avoid an interruption of purchases in that jurisdiction, which could impair the transmission of monetary 

policy to the Greek economy while it is still recovering from the fallout from the pandemic. Net 

purchases under the PEPP could also be resumed, if necessary, to counter negative shocks related to 

the pandemic. 

Key ECB interest rates 

The Governing Council undertook a careful review of the conditions which, according to its forward 

guidance, should be satisfied before it starts raising the key ECB interest rates. As a result of this 

assessment, the Governing Council concluded that those conditions have been satisfied.   

Accordingly, and in line with the Governing Council’s policy sequencing, the Governing Council 

intends to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points at its July monetary policy meeting. In 

the meantime, the Governing Council decided to leave the interest rate on the main refinancing 

operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility unchanged at 

0.00%, 0.25% and -0.50% respectively. 

 
 
Looking further ahead, the Governing Council expects to raise the key ECB interest rates again in 

September. The calibration of this rate increase will depend on the updated medium-term inflation 

outlook. If the medium-term inflation outlook persists or deteriorates, a larger increment will be 

appropriate at the September meeting. 

Beyond September, based on its current assessment, the Governing Council anticipates that a 

gradual but sustained path of further increases in interest rates will be appropriate. In line with the 

Governing Council’s commitment to its 2% medium-term target, the pace at which the Governing 

Council adjusts its monetary policy will depend on the incoming data and how it assesses inflation to 

develop in the medium term.   

Refinancing operations 

The Governing Council will continue to monitor bank funding conditions and ensure that the maturing 

of operations under the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) does 

not hamper the smooth transmission of its monetary policy. The Governing Council will also regularly 

assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its monetary policy stance. As announced 

previously, the special conditions applicable under TLTRO III will end on 23 June 2022.   

*** 

The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, incorporating flexibility if 

warranted, to ensure that inflation stabilises at its 2% target over the medium term. The pandemic has 

shown that, under stressed conditions, flexibility in the design and conduct of asset purchases has 

helped to counter the impaired transmission of monetary policy and made the Governing Council’s 

efforts to achieve its goal more effective. Within the ECB’s mandate, under stressed conditions, 

flexibility will remain an element of monetary policy whenever threats to monetary policy transmission 

jeopardise the attainment of price stability. 

The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 

conference starting at 14:30 CET today. 

 
 
 
 
 
Monetary policy statement 

Press conference 

Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 

Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. I would like to thank 

President Knot for his kind hospitality and express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent 

organisation of today’s meeting of the Governing Council. 

High inflation is a major challenge for all of us. The Governing Council will make sure that inflation 

returns to our two per cent target over the medium term. 

In May inflation again rose significantly, mainly because of surging energy and food prices, including 

due to the impact of the war. But inflation pressures have broadened and intensified, with prices for 

many goods and services increasing strongly. Eurosystem staff have revised their baseline inflation 

projections up significantly. These projections indicate that inflation will remain undesirably elevated 

for some time. However, moderating energy costs, the easing of supply disruptions related to the 

pandemic and the normalisation of monetary policy are expected to lead to a decline in inflation. The 

new staff projections foresee annual inflation at 6.8 per cent in 2022, before it is projected to decline to 

3.5 per cent in 2023 and 2.1 per cent in 2024 – higher than in the March projections. This means that 

headline inflation at the end of the projection horizon is projected to be slightly above our target. 

Inflation excluding energy and food is projected to average 3.3 per cent in 2022, 2.8 per cent in 2023 

and 2.3 per cent in 2024 – also above the March projections.   

Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine continues to weigh on the economy in Europe and 

beyond. It is disrupting trade, is leading to shortages of materials and is contributing to high energy 

and commodity prices. These factors will continue to weigh on confidence and dampen growth, 

especially in the near term. However, the conditions are in place for the economy to continue to grow 

on account of the ongoing reopening of the economy, a strong labour market, fiscal support and 

savings built up during the pandemic. Once current headwinds abate, economic activity is expected to 

pick up again. This outlook is broadly reflected in the Eurosystem staff projections, which foresee 

annual real GDP growth at 2.8 per cent in 2022, 2.1 per cent in 2023 and 2.1 per cent in 2024. 

Compared with the March projections, the outlook has been revised down significantly for 2022 and 

2023, while for 2024 it has been revised up. 

 
 
On the basis of our updated assessment, we decided to take further steps in normalising our monetary 

policy. Throughout this process, the Governing Council will maintain optionality, data-dependence, 

gradualism and flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.   

First, we decided to end net asset purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) as of 1 July 

2022. The Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from 

maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it 

starts raising the key ECB interest rates and, in any case, for as long as necessary to maintain ample 

liquidity conditions and an appropriate monetary policy stance. 

Second, we undertook a careful review of the conditions which, according to our forward guidance, 

should be satisfied before we start raising the key ECB interest rates. As a result of this assessment, 

the Governing Council concluded that those conditions have been satisfied. Accordingly, and in line 

with our policy sequencing, we intend to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points at our July 

monetary policy meeting.   

Looking further ahead, we expect to raise the key ECB interest rates again in September. The 

calibration of this rate increase will depend on the updated medium-term inflation outlook. If the 

medium-term inflation outlook persists or deteriorates, a larger increment will be appropriate at our 

September meeting.     

Third, beyond September, based on our current assessment, we anticipate that a gradual but 

sustained path of further increases in interest rates will be appropriate. In line with our commitment to 

our two per cent medium-term target, the pace at which we adjust our monetary policy will depend on 

the incoming data and how we assess inflation to develop in the medium term.   

Within the Governing Council’s mandate, under stressed conditions, flexibility will remain an element 

of monetary policy whenever threats to monetary policy transmission jeopardise the attainment of 

price stability. 

The decisions taken today are set out in full in a press release available on our website.   

I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing, and will then 

explain our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 

Economic activity 

In the near term, we expect activity to be dampened by high energy costs, the deterioration in the 

terms of trade, greater uncertainty and the adverse impact of high inflation on disposable income. The 

 
 
war in Ukraine and renewed pandemic restrictions in China have made supply bottlenecks worse 

again. As a result, firms face higher costs and disruptions in their supply chains, and their outlook for 

future output has deteriorated.   

However, there are also factors supporting economic activity and these are expected to strengthen 

over the months to come. The reopening of those sectors most affected by the pandemic and a strong 

labour market, with more people in jobs, will continue to support incomes and consumption. In 

addition, savings accumulated during the pandemic are a buffer.   

Fiscal policy is helping to cushion the impact of the war. Targeted and temporary budgetary measures 

protect those people bearing the brunt of higher energy prices while limiting the risk of adding to 

inflationary pressures. The swift implementation of the investment and structural reform plans under 

the Next Generation EU programme, the “Fit for 55” package and the REPowerEU plan would also 

help the euro area economy to grow faster in a sustainable manner and become more resilient to 

global shocks.   

Inflation 

Inflation rose further to 8.1 per cent in May. Although governments have intervened and have helped 

slow energy inflation, energy prices stand 39.2 per cent above their levels one year ago. Market-based 

indicators suggest that global energy prices will stay high in the near term but will then moderate to 

some extent. Food prices rose 7.5 per cent in May, in part reflecting the importance of Ukraine and 

Russia among the main global producers of agricultural goods.   

Prices have also gone up more strongly because of renewed supply bottlenecks and because of 

recovering domestic demand, especially in the services sector, as our economy reopens. Price rises 

are becoming more widespread across sectors. Accordingly, measures of underlying inflation have 

been rising further.   

The labour market continues to improve, with unemployment remaining at its historical low of 6.8 per 

cent in April. Job vacancies across many sectors show that there is robust demand for labour. Wage 

growth, including in forward-looking indicators, has started to pick up. Over time, the strengthening of 

the economy and some catch-up effects should support faster growth in wages. While most measures 

of longer-term inflation expectations derived from financial markets and from expert surveys stand at 

around two per cent, initial signs of above-target revisions in those measures warrant close 

monitoring.   

 
 
Risk assessment   

Risks relating to the pandemic have declined but the war continues to be a significant downside risk to 

growth. In particular, a major risk would be a further disruption in the energy supply to the euro area, 

as reflected in the downside scenario included in the staff projections. Furthermore, if the war were to 

escalate, economic sentiment could worsen, supply-side constraints could increase, and energy and 

food costs could remain persistently higher than expected.   

The risks surrounding inflation are primarily on the upside. The risks to the medium-term inflation 

outlook include a durable worsening of the production capacity of our economy, persistently high 

energy and food prices, inflation expectations rising above our target and higher than anticipated wage 

rises. However, if demand were to weaken over the medium term, it would lower pressures on prices. 

Financial and monetary conditions 

Market interest rates have increased in response to the changing outlook for inflation and monetary 

policy. With benchmark interest rates rising, bank funding costs have increased, and this has fed into 

higher bank lending rates in particular for households. Nevertheless, lending to firms picked up in 

March. This was because of the continued need to finance investment and working capital, against the 

backdrop of increasing production costs, persisting supply bottlenecks and lower reliance on market 

funding. Lending to households also increased, reflecting continued robust demand for mortgages.   

In line with our monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council has undertaken its biannual in-depth 

assessment of the interrelation between monetary policy and financial stability. The environment for 

financial stability has worsened since our last review in December 2021, especially over the short 

term. In particular, lower growth and increasing cost pressures, as well as rising risk-free rates and 

sovereign bond yields, could lead to a further deterioration in the financing conditions faced by 

borrowers. At the same time, tighter financing conditions could reduce some existing financial stability 

vulnerabilities over the medium term. Banks, which started the year with solid capital positions and 

improving asset quality, are now facing greater credit risk. We will watch these factors closely. In any 

case, macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence in preserving financial stability and 

addressing medium-term vulnerabilities.   

 
 
Conclusion 

Summing up, Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine is severely affecting the euro area 

economy and the outlook is still surrounded by high uncertainty. But the conditions are in place for the 

economy to continue to grow and to recover further over the medium term.   

Inflation is undesirably high and is expected to remain above our target for some time. We will make 

sure that inflation returns to our two per cent target over the medium term. Accordingly, we decided to 

take further steps in normalising our monetary policy. The calibration of our policies will remain data-

dependent and reflect our evolving assessment of the outlook. We stand ready to adjust all of our 

instruments within our mandate, incorporating flexibility if warranted, to ensure that inflation stabilises 

at our two per cent target over the medium term.   

We are now ready to take your questions. 

 
 
 
